---
title: "12 Reflection 2: Explainable AI"
category: Intelligent Agents
---


One of the primary conclusions of the first discussion forum, is that transparency and oversight form a key part of responsible agent deployment.

Understanding how an AI system reached a decision has many benefits, including assessing fairness and identifying areas for improvement (Gunning et al., 2019). However, current approaches strongly lean towards the latter, experts perform the analysis, with the goal of improving the system. 
Building explainability with end users in mind would be an effective way to build trust in AI systems (Dazeley, Vamplew and Cruz, 2023). Despite these potential benefits, XAI has not seen widespread implementation (Haque, Islam and Mikalef, 2023). 

In my development project, explainability is low. The project uses LLMs for four functions. Generating search keywords, ranking search result relevance, summarizing individual results, and creating a final answer. In none of those cases is the LLM able to explain why it chose the words or ranking that it did. Thinking traces might help, however thinking was disabled in the interests of remaining easy to run on local hardware. The project architecture also uses non-LLM agents, however, these agents are deterministic and therefore standard logging is sufficient for understanding their output.

**References**

Dazeley, R., Vamplew, P. and Cruz, F. (2023) “Explainable reinforcement learning for broad-XAI: a conceptual framework and survey,” Neural Computing and Applications, 35(23), pp. 16893–16916. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-023-08423-1.

Gunning, D. et al. (2019) “XAI—Explainable artificial intelligence,” Science Robotics, 4(37), p. eaay7120. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aay7120.

Haque, A.B., Islam, A.K.M.N. and Mikalef, P. (2023) “Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) from a user perspective: A synthesis of prior literature and problematizing avenues for future research,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 186, p. 122120. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.122120.

