---
title: "08 Discussion 2: Initial Post: Four Themes of AI-Assisted Writing"
category: Machine Learning
---

The risks and benefits of AI can be divided into a few main themes, supporting existing workflows, skill development, loss of human touch, and difficulty of verifying data. These themes manifest in different ways in various disciplines.

In administrative work, AI can significantly speed up existing tasks such as data entry, computer troubleshooting and preparing reports (Pickett and Pennington, 2024). However, it may be difficult to trace data in a report to the sources (Pickett and Pennington, 2024), which raises concerns about data privacy and accuracy (Pickett and Pennington, 2024).

In academic writing, AI can speed up initial research and help draft manuscripts and proposals (Mondal and Mondal, 2023). AI can also support academic development by providing more thorough feedback on the quality of ideas and writing than peers or mentors (Mondal and Mondal, 2023). However, the information provided by AI must be carefully reviewed for accuracy (Mondal and Mondal, 2023). Dependence on AI also carries the risk of undermining critical thinking and writing skills (Mondal and Mondal, 2023) if used directly, rather than for providing feedback.

For creative writing, AI can support the brainstorming process by creating prompts or alternative ideas (Vainikka, Soronen and Kallio, 2024). Similar to academic writing, AI can provide immediate feedback, allowing much faster skill development (Vainikka, Soronen and Kallio, 2024). However, it is difficult to verify where ideas generated by AI come from, leading to a strong possibility of accidental plagiarism or copyright infringement (Vainikka, Soronen and Kallio, 2024). Overuse of AI in the writing process may result in content that repeats patterns found in other work (Vainikka, Soronen and Kallio, 2024), harming the unique qualities of the finished product.

I believe that these four themes, two positive and two negative, apply to all areas of AI-assisted writing.

**References**

Mondal, H. and Mondal, S. (2023) ‘ChatGPT in academic writing: Maximizing its benefits and minimizing the risks’, Indian Journal of Ophthalmology, 71(12), pp. 3600–3606. Available at: https://doi.org/10.4103/IJO.IJO_718_23.

Pickett, J. and Pennington, M. (2024) ‘Take the Leap! Steps to Integrate AI Into Your Work: Open Access’, AMWA Journal, 39(2). Available at: https://doi.org/10.55752/amwa.2024.349.

Vainikka, E., Soronen, A. and Kallio, S.-M. (2024) ‘Is prompt engineering the future of screenwriting? Views of professional screenwriters and commissioners about the impact of AI technologies on their profession’, Critical Studies in Television: The International Journal of Television Studies, p. 17496020241269277. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/17496020241269277.
